I. INTRODUCTION
High-Performance Computing (HPC) refers to the use of high computational power to solve complex calculations at high speed. Examples of HPC applications include brain simulations, weather and climate modeling, and genome sequencing. Traditionally, such computations take place on computing clusters and supercomputers, where HPC jobs are executed on a statically defined hardware allocation after being placed in a queue. However, modern cloud environments such as Amazon EC2 and Microsoft Azure offer a wide range of computing resources on demand, often without waiting times, and on a pay-per-hour basis. This makes them an attractive alternative for HPC calculations.
At the time of writing, Amazon EC2 offers 637 different instance types. The instance types are categorized into families and the available hardware and costs per hour are available on Amazon's website. Nevertheless, it remains challenging for users to make an optimal choice for their application. Recognizing this problem, Amazon offers instance type recommendation, which recommends an instance type to a user based on historical use over a 14-day period . However, application execution time is affected by input size and parameters, in combination with the hardware characteristics, in a typically hard-to-predict way. This means that the optimal instance type can be different, even for the same application. Smaragdos et al. showed that for a simulation model of the human brain, a CPU version, a GPU-optimized version, and a FPGA version of the application can all be optimal choices, depending on the input parameters such as size of the neural network and connectivity.
We present Oikonomos-II, a reinforcement-learning resource-recommendation system for cloud HPC. Oikonomos-II approaches cloud-resource recommendation as a contextual multi-armed bandit problem. It uses incoming jobs from researchers to both explore different cloud instance type options, while also exploiting the knowledge it gains in the process. As opposed to earlier work, which was either search-based or prediction-based, Oikonomos-II combines the best elements of both approaches, and eliminates their main weaknesses. It can therefore be seen as the first hybrid system for this purpose. This work is a novel approach over our previous work, Oikonomos , which used an MLP, but was still purely prediction-based.
The contributions of this work are as follows:
• A novel, reinforcement-learning instance recommender for HPC applications in heterogeneous cloud environments. By using a deep contextual bandit algorithm, it overcomes several limitations of earlier approaches. • An improvement of the Neural-LinUCB algorithm by Xu et al. : applying the principle of soft update makes it possible to use much deeper artificial neural networks, and thus the representation of much more complex context-reward relationships. • A performance analysis of Oikonomos-II on four diverse HPC applications, showing the robustness of its reinforcement-learning approach and its potential for general (re)use.
The paper is organized as follows: in Section II, we give an extensive overview of related works, addressing the strengths and weaknesses of the various publications. In Section III, we describe our system and the underlying algorithms in detail. In Section IV, the four applications that we used for evaluation are described as well as the relevant implementation-specific details. In Section V, the performance of Oikonomos-II is evaluated on four existing HPC applications. We show that Oikonomos-II explores the available options effectively and exploits the knowledge it gains, successfully selecting the best instance type for incoming jobs in the vast majority of cases, for all applications. In Section VI, we present a discussion of our findings as well as potential improvements. Section VII concludes the work.