1 Introduction
Large language models (LLMs) have exhibited astounding capabilities as versatile task-solving agents, endowed with a rich blend of knowledge and skills. Nevertheless, they still face difficulties in tackling various tasks that require intensive knowledge and reasoning, such as avoiding hallucination , employing slow-thinking strategies , ensuring trustworthiness , and in combining diverse domain knowledge and long-horizon planning. In contrast, humans often exploit the benefits of collaborative problem solving, which enables them to work together effectively to solve non-routine problems in diverse domains and enhance the quality and reliability of the solutions by distributing the workload among specialties and applying a diversity of perspectives and expertise .
Inspired by collaborative problem solving, several recent works have improved the task-solving capabilities of LLMs by integrating multi-agent discussion. However, most of these multiagent systems depend on handcrafted or user-specified agents, with specific roles and necessitating human supervision, which often restricts the scope of collaborative applications. Moreover, manually Table : Comparison of existing and proposed frameworks for LLM-based Agent framework.
To synthesize heterogeneous information from diverse domains is often a crucial requirement in creative industries and other real-world scenarios. We illustrate a concrete example of how AutoAgents tackles the challenging task of writing a novel about the awakening of artificial intelligence in Figure . The Story Planner and Researcher collaborate to devise the plot of the story with their respective expertise, while the Character Developer and Writer enrich the novel content through imagination based on the story. Moreover, we conduct quantitative experiments and case studies in complex tasks to demonstrate the effectiveness of AutoAgents. We also conduct a comprehensive analysis and demonstrate the importance of dynamic agents for handling complex tasks, the indispensability of self-refinement for proficient agents, and the effectiveness of collaborative conversation.
To summarize, this paper makes the following novel contributions: First, we propose AutoAgents, a novel framework that dynamically synthesizes and coordinates multiple expert agents to form customized AI teams for diverse tasks. Second, we conduct rigorous quantitative experiments on two challenging tasks and demonstrate that AutoAgents significantly improves both knowledge acquisition and reasoning ability in LLMs and outperforms other generated-agent frameworks. Third, we showcase AutoAgents' ability to adapt to complex tasks by applying it in various scenarios such as software development. Finally, we conduct a thorough investigation and reveal the importance of dynamic agents for accommodating complex tasks and the necessity of self-refinement for proficient agents, and the efficacy of collaborative conversation.