2 Storage Format & Dataflow
In this section, we first discuss various sparse storage formats and then introduce the hierarchical bit-tree storage format. Following this, we present our optimized algorithm, which utilizes a dataflow designed to exploit bit-tree sparsity and accommodate variable unstructured sparsity in matrices. Our approach includes an outputstationary, tiled, row-wise product matrix multiplication dataflow tailored to the bit-tree storage format. Finally, we propose an offline row access reorganization and grouping strategy to alleviate memory traffic bottlenecks associated with the dataflow.
2.1 Hierarchical Bit-Tree Storage Format
Figure presents the trend of the storage costs of the dense and commonly used sparse formats for a 𝑀 × 𝑁 matrix with varying density. Coordinate-based formats (CSR and COO) use meta-data, typically an entire list or pointers to store the coordinates of each non-zero element. The coordinate is used to index non-zero elements during matrix multiplication to effectively compute only the non-zero products. The size of the largest matrices in the target application domain determines the number of bits allocated for this coordinate encoding. This can lead to significant, unexpected overhead for the variable sparsity levels commonly encountered in ML workloads, sometimes even exceeding the storage cost of the dense format (Figure ).
In contrast, bit-sparse formats like Bitmaps employ a simple binary encoding for non-zero elements, resulting in a consistent storage overhead regardless of sparsity level. This makes them highly suitable for a wide range of sparse matrices from a compressed storage perspective. However, conventional bitmaps require dynamic decoding of arbitrarily long binary vectors to access nonzero elements, introducing complexity, reducing scalability, and hindering hardware acceleration.
Efforts have been directed towards utilizing coarse-grained pointers and bitmaps , which involve compressing and skipping larger, entirely zero tiles within the matrix. This hierarchical organization aims to eliminate completely zero tiles during matrix operations on conventional dataflow architectures. However,  this approach struggles to tackle sparsity effectively. It necessitates storing and computing all zeroes within a block that contains at least one non-zero element, resulting in performance and efficiency degradation. This drawback becomes particularly apparent in moderately sparse matrices where nearly every block may contain at least one non-zero element. Skipping at a coarser granularity needs to be combined with compression and skipping at a finer granularity to avoid any zero-valued storage and computations.
We adopt a hierarchical bit-tree format that encodes sequences of consecutive zeros as a single zero at a higher level, similar to hierarchical Run-Length Encoding used in Huffman trees , to address the challenges associated with variable sparsity. Bit-trees evolve from bitmaps by encoding packs of consecutive zeros in the bitmap as a single zero at a higher level. Figure illustrates that the bit-tree offers the most compact memory footprint across varying densities, except in the cases of hypersparse and dense matrices.
Bit-trees can be designed with an arbitrary number of levels, recursively condensing sequences of multiple zeros into a single zero. Based on experimental evaluation, we encode/pack a sequence of four zeros as a single zero. The greater the number of levels, the more efficient the encoding for matrices with higher sparsity. For the purpose of this discussion, focusing on moderate sparsity, we use a two-level bit-tree with the levels denoted as l1 and l2, illustrated in Figure (a). In this representation, a group of four consecutive elements at l2 is referred to as a "leaf", and a non-zero leaf exhibits one-to-one mapping with its corresponding actual values in the uncompressed matrix. The compressed values stored in memory do not consist of any zeroes with the exception of a small amount of zeroes required for padding at the end of a tile's storage to maintain memory alignment. Decoding operates inversely; each non-zero element in l1 corresponds to a leaf in l2 with one or more non-zero values, while every zero in l1 corresponds to four consecutive zeros in l2 that do not need to be stored or computed. We present a sensitivity analysis of the storage format parameters in the experimental evaluations.
Given the binary nature, the storage cost of bit-tree is similar to a naïve bitmap for moderate sparsities. In fact, it is better at higher sparsities and is significantly more amenable to hardware decoding. To the best of our knowledge, ours is the first work to introduce bit-trees for accelerating sparse matrix multiplication. Capstan employs bit-trees for vectorizing addition on non-zeroes clustered along the diagonal in hyper-sparse matrices. However, their approach calculates addresses explicitly by nesting iterations over multiple levels for these extremely sparse matrices, which becomes inefficient at medium sparsity levels. In contrast, we use the knowledge of the relative positioning of non-zeroes in the tree and exploit data locality within bit-trees through our dataflow. We introduce low-cost architectural support to efficiently retrieve the required data at different levels during matrix multiplication. More specifically, we use simple, myopic zero-detection hardware that employs multiple passes on four-bit sequences to find the non-zeroes' relative positions at each level of the tree. These relative positions help us dynamically map the non-zero values to their desired compute positions. This localized zero-detection facilitates parallel and efficient sparse vector operations in our dataflow, ensuring performance efficiency and scalability.
2.2 Dataflow and Memory Access
We customize the dataflow, the corresponding tiling strategy, and the memory access patterns to optimize performance for retrieving and processing on non-zeroes in the bit-tree. Our observation indicates that the packing of non-zero elements in the bit-tree aligns well with the state-of-the-art row-wise sparse matrix multiplication dataflow . Additionally, while traversing bit-trees using our tiling strategy, we also reorganize the accessing of the rows based on sparsity patterns, alleviating known irregular memory access issues associated with the dataflow. matches the storage format and tailoring an architecture accordingly are critical factors in addressing inefficiencies and bottlenecks in sparse matrix multiplication. Prior accelerators utilizing innerproduct and outer-product dataflows face inefficiencies with sparse inner-join, irregular merging of large partial sum matrices, significant on-chip memory requirements, and challenges related to load imbalance . These dataflows have limited parallelism and are also not suitable for handling bit-trees.
Gustavson's algorithm enables row-wise product, an efficient and highly parallel algorithm for sparse matrix multiplication used by some state-of-the-art works . Here, all the nonzero elements from a single row of the stationary matrix (input 1) are multiplied by the non-zero entries from the corresponding rows of the streaming matrix (input 2). The row indices of the streaming matrix are determined by the column positions of the non-zero values from the stationary matrix, as shown in Figure . The sparse vectors (partial sums) thus produced are accumulated in the corresponding row of the output matrix.
While the adoption of row-wise product undeniably mitigates many of the inefficiencies with prior dataflows, it still has a few drawbacks. Notably, it has the issue of random and frequent irregular accesses to the streaming rows. Further, it exhibits inefficiencies in the sparse vector addition process required to merge partial sum rows. This necessitates the accelerators using Gustavson's dataflow to use high-radix mergers, reconfigurable interconnects, and high-bandwidth memory resources .
The challenges posed by partial sum mergers and irregular streaming become more pronounced as we transition from hypersparse matrices to relatively denser matrices characterized by a higher number of non-zero elements (nnz) per row. A greater nnz per row implies increased irregular off-chip traffic associated with the streaming matrix and a higher number of index comparison operations for each partial sum row merge operation required to generate the final output row. Recognizing these issues, we present an algorithm that identifies sparsity patterns to reorganize and group the execution order of stationary matrix rows, mitigating the irregularity in accessing streaming matrix rows during inference. Moreover, we introduce a multi-pass zero-detection mechanism on bit-trees in hardware to effectively address partial sum merging bottlenecks by circumventing explicit addressing through low-overhead control logic.
2.2.2 Row Access Reorganization:
The conventional method for computing row-wise product faces a memory bottleneck when fetching streaming rows . This occurs because while row-wise product reduces output partial sum traffic, it comes at the cost of heightened traffic of the streaming matrix. During sparse matrix multiplication, these streaming matrix rows are accessed frequently and randomly depending on the positions of non-zero elements in the stationary matrix, as depicted in Figure . For instance, computing the highlighted output row in the figure necessitates accessing both the first and fifth rows in the streaming matrix. Although these rows are retrieved on-chip, it's uncertain whether they will be utilized for the subsequent output row's calculation, which is totally contingent upon the non-zero coordinates of the next stationary row. Our objective here is to maximize the reuse of these on-chip fetched rows, thereby decreasing off-chip traffic and minimizing the likelihood of main memory access stalls when a row is not present on-chip. To achieve this, we propose a metric to evaluate streaming row traffic based on stationary rows' characteristics. The execution order of stationary input rows is reorganized according to their dissimilarity. Similar rows are processed sequentially, improving data reuse and reducing off-chip traffic for streaming rows. Importantly, this reorganization is informed by a thorough analysis of the dataflow and does not require any information about the streaming matrix.
The row-wise product dataflow enables parallelism at multiple levels. Processing one stationary row independently produces one output row, and we face no sequential interdependency between the execution of different rows in the stationary matrix. This parallelism inherent in row-wise product yields the ability to process rows out of order. We define a dissimilarity index between every ordered pair of stationary matrix rows. Revisiting the dataflow, dissimilarity, in this context, quantifies the additional streaming rows that must be retrieved when consecutively processing stationary rows. Specifically, it is the number of positions in the second row that lack a corresponding non-zero value in the first row. For instance, in Figure (c), the dissimilarity between row 1 and row 2 is 1. This is because the streaming row required by row 2 isn't already fetched during the execution of row 1. The dissimilarity index is defined for every pair of consecutively executing rows in a matrix. Our approach employs this dissimilarity awareness at the row level to efficiently execute stationary input matrix rows based on memory-access patterns. During the processing of the 𝑛 + 1'th row, streaming rows corresponding to these additional non-zeros over the 𝑛'th row necessitate fetching from the main memory for multiplication. The dissimilarity index for an entire matrix is thus the sum of dissimilarities between each pair of consecutive rows. We leverage this dissimilarity metric to establish an optimization criterion for offline reorganizing and grouping of stationary rows.
Analogous to the principle of batching, where on-chip-fetched weights are reused, reorganizing the execution of stationary matrix optimizes the reuse of streaming rows already fetched. For each row in the stationary input matrix, if there exists a hypothetical parent row with no dissimilarities, the row is absorbed as a sub-pattern of the parent pattern. This implies that processing a row after its parent row wouldn't necessitate extra off-chip access. For example, in Figure (c), no additional access would be needed if row 2 is executed after row n+1. Analyzing the rows results in a set of distinct patterns with dissimilarity indexes greater than zero, labeled as p1, p2, p3... pn, as depicted in Figure . By leveraging insights into global patterns in the matrix and considering the maximum available streaming rows storage capacity on-chip, we can reorder stationary row access to maximize data reuse. Parent patterns typically contain a higher number of non-zero elements, where most of the latency in fetching streaming rows can be efficiently masked. Subsequently, processing all sub-patterns of a parent pattern sequentially reduces redundant off-chip traffic significantly.
We then analyze the dissimilarity among the parent patterns within the matrix. We group rows with lower dissimilarities into balanced clusters for processing. For instance, if executing pattern p2 after p1 requires two additional streaming row accesses, while executing pattern p3 after p2 requires three extra accesses, it's logical to execute them in the sequence p1, p2, p3. Moreover, if patterns pn and p1 exhibit high dissimilarity (indicating minimal reuse), we segregate such patterns into separate groups. These groups do not benefit from sequential processing and can be processed in parallel. Hence, patterns with lower dissimilarities are organized into balanced clusters, taking advantage of the row-wise independence of the stationary side. This reorganized and grouped execution collectively diminishes random access to the streaming matrix, consequently reducing unnecessary memory traffic.
2.3 Memory Access Optimizations
2.3.1 Output Workspace: Kjolstad et al. introduced the notion of a workspace as a temporary tensor, typically dense, allowing for rapid insertion and random access in sparse matrix operations. When integrated at an architectural level, this workspace in the local memory is mapped to the main memory either as sparse or dense tensors, with explicitly decoupled data orchestration . A dense output workspace enables efficient and only essential processing over non-zeroes in the input matrix while requiring minimal additional hardware for indexing into the workspace. In our execution model, this indexing translates to output partial sum redirection, which is already performed by the zero detection hardware in conjunction with crossbars, helping us exploit data locality. Further, upon analyzing the ML workloads, we find that, given the moderate sparsities on the inputs, the average sparsity of output matrices is merely 8.1%. Given our prior analysis of storage formats for variably sparse matrices, it becomes evident that maintaining a dense workspace for these matrices is preferable not only for quick insertion and access but also from storage and on-chip traffic standpoints. We further elaborate output workspaces through our tiling strategy ahead. matrix with a compressed 𝐾 × 𝑁 (streaming) matrix. The stationary matrix is processed one row at a time, involving sequential access to non-zero elements and parsing the associated bit-tree to decode the relative position of the next non-zero. These positions are then utilized to retrieve streaming rows and their respective bit-trees for multiplication. The streaming matrix is partitioned into chunks with c=16 columns, and rows within a chunk are called row-slices.
A chunk comprises M row-slices (line 4), and a slice encompasses four l1 nodes or up to four l2 leaves of the bit-tree, corresponding to 16 values in the original matrix. While processing all the row slices of a streaming matrix chunk, the corresponding partial sum (psum) slice of the output row remains stationary for accumulation, forming the output workspace (line 11). Each processing element that processes one output row has one output workspace register file. Streaming slices (line 8) within a chunk are managed using a scratchpad between successive executions of the stationary rows. The row-access reorganization strategy explained earlier is applied to the stationary matrix to maximize the reuse of streaming slices within the scratchpad. This tiling of the sparse matrix according to its actual dimensions is data-agnostic and is known as coordinate space tiling . When adopting coordinate-space tiling, we face a challenge when fetching the bit-tree l1 of a completely zero slice, necessitating a flush before resuming computation for the next row-slice. This could result in stalls when handling large hyper-sparse matrices, as they are unsuitable for efficient processing with two-level bit-trees and require higher-order bit-trees. ZeD's algorithm is generalizable and scalable to such hyper-sparse matrices, only requiring multiplexing of the same microarchitecture to support the higher-order bit-trees.