II. SIMULATION CHALLENGES FOR HPC STORAGE
We have identified four key challenges for the accurate simulation of high-performance storage systems in HPC platforms. The first two are specific to this domain, while the last two are relevant to the simulation of parallel and distributed computing systems in general.
Input data is hard to find, often incomplete or imprecise, and not usable out-of-the-box.
Assuming that an accurate high-performance storage system simulator is available, it must be provided input data that describes the workload to be simulated. Several "workload traces" have been collected on HPC platforms from various logs and produced by various monitoring tools (batch scheduler logs, I/O traces, parallel file system logs, . . . ). The goal is to combine these traces to construct a complete workload description that can be provided as input to the simulator. Unfortunately, not all necessary traces are always available for a single platform, and one often must work with incomplete data. Even if all the necessary data is available, it must be carefully curated because it contains artefacts due to incidents or misuses of the platforms, or to limitations or bugs of the monitoring tools .
A simulator cannot be accurate for every I/O workload.
The heterogeneity of I/O workloads executed on real-world systems is high . Furthermore, an inspection of actual application traces shows that many jobs are outliers, with behaviors (due to bugs, due to idiosyncratic implementations) that are hard to model and thus to simulate. This is because a program can implement I/O in many different ways, including ways that are vastly sub-optimal. In addition, even if we were to design a job model with enough flexibility to represent such a wide array of I/O behaviors, it would be very complex to benefit from it. Indeed, we don't have enough knowledge about the jobs to match each of them with a correct configuration of the model (see Challenge #1 above).
The level of details of the simulation must be chosen to achieve a sensible accuracy/scalability trade-off.
A natural approach is to implement a simulator's simulation models with high levels of details in order to reproduce near-exact real-world behaviors. In many cases, such as the simulation of large HPC workloads and systems, doing so can lead to prohibitive time and space complexity due to large numbers of simulated discrete events. Furthermore, not all information is always available to implement highly detailed simulation models. For these reasons, one must instead resort to implementing less detailed, and thus likely less accurate, simulation models. The challenge is that for each component of the target system one must choose an appropriate level of detail at which to model this component, so that, overall, the simulator achieves sufficient levels of accuracy and of scalability.
Calibrating a simulator with respect to ground-truth data so as to maximize simulation accuracy is difficult.
All simulation models in a simulator come with configuration parameters, and appropriate values must be chosen for these parameters. Because simulation models are often not implemented at a high level of details, model parameter values cannot simply be picked based on the hardware specification of the system being simulated. For instance, say that a realworld network topology is abstracted away as a single macrolink. The latency and bandwidth values of this macro-link that maximize simulation accuracy are some complex functions of the latencies and bandwidths of the individual network links in the real-world network topology. In general, parameter values must be calibrated so that the simulator's accuracy is maximized with respect to available ground-truth data. This amounts to solving a multi-variate optimization problem in which the objective function is some simulation accuracy metric and the variables are the simulation model parameters. In the field of parallel and distributed computing, simulation calibration is often not performed and, when it is, it is mostly a labor-intensive and manual process .
To the best of our knowledge, there is no validated simulator of high-performance storage systems for which the above challenges have been addressed satisfactorily.