III. RELATED WORK
A. I/O and Storage Systems Analysis
The evaluation of high-performance storage systems has been actively pursued because, as applications' I/O requirements continue to grow, storage systems need to be studied and optimized throughout their lifetimes . Multiple studies have focused on analyzing the behavior of specific storage system deployments over months of production usage , , , , , . The goal of most of these works is to provide guidance to users and administrators of these specific deployments, without attempting to generalize to other hardware architectures or other low-level configurations of the system. They also require access to a significant volume of logs, often collected from multiple sources inside the studied systems (in , fives different logs were used). Other studies strive for more generalizable conclusions , , sometimes providing methods for tuning file system or application configuration parameters , . These works, however, require extensive access to an already deployed file system, and are limited to configuration parameter tuning (no changes in the hardware infrastructure).
B. Simulation Approaches
Given the advantages of simulations over real-world experiments, it is not surprising that many parallel and distributed computing researchers have developed simulators, even though relatively few have focused on the simulation of distributed storage systems , , , .
Any simulator must implement simulation models that mimic the behavior of the components of actual systems. The most natural approach is to implement these models with a high level of details, in an attempt to reproduce "microscopic" real behaviors and achieve the highest possible accuracy (packet-level network simulation, cycle-accurate CPU simulation, block-level I/O device simulation). However, this is at the expense of scalability as the number of discrete events is typically proportional to the size of the workload being simulated. This scalability issue is problematic when wanting to simulate HPC workloads with large compute and data volumes. One solution is to use Parallel Discrete Event Simulation (PDES) by which the simulation itself is a parallel application that executes on an HPC cluster , , . This approach is used in , which, like this work, focuses on simulating a high-performance storage system. However, achieving high parallel efficiency with PDES is known to be challenging and, when simulating large systems and long-running workloads, the resource expenses for conducting extensive experimental campaigns can be prohibitive (in this work, for instance, we execute thousands of simulations).
The way to increase simulation scalability is to employ less detailed simulation models. These models aim to capture "macroscopic" behaviors of real-world systems, with time and space complexities orders of magnitude lower than those of the "microscopic" models discussed earlier. In the specific context of the simulation of high-performance storage systems, previous authors have developed simulators with such models , , . These simulators are developed from scratch using a generic discrete-event simulation framework (namely SimPy ). However, considerable effort has been invested by the community in the development of discreteevent simulation frameworks for easing the development of simulators of parallel and distributed computing systems , , , , , , . But these frameworks typically only provide simplistic simulation models of I/O resources and do not provide out-of-the-box solutions for the simulation of high-performance storage systems.
This work aims to address the challenges posed by the simulation of high-performance storage systems described in Section II. To do so we propose an architecture and an implementation of a storage system simulator called FIVES. In contrast to the aforementioned simulators, FIVES builds on (and contributes to) existing and well-established parallel and distributed computing simulation frameworks: WRENCH and SimGrid . We chose these frameworks because they are widely-used, provide the necessary simulation abstractions and models for this work, and have been the object of thorough validation studies that have demonstrated that they can achieve high accuracy , , , , , , , , .