VIII. CONCLUSION
This work has presented the FIVES simulator of highperformance storage systems, which was developed using but also has contributed to state-of-the-art simulation frameworks. We have identified four challenges for the accurate simulation of high-performance storage systems, and have shown possible approaches for addressing these challenges. These include methods for modeling job I/Os, for coping with job heterogeneity, and for automating simulator calibration. An experimental evaluation based on one year's worth of supercomputer traces has allowed us to quantify achievable levels of simulation accuracy. Furthermore, we confirmed the coherence of our results with short experiments, including varying the number of OSTs in our platform model. This led to expected results in terms of bandwidth impact, conforming to our initial evaluation of FIVES. Although we have performed our investigation in the context of the Lustre file system, we believe the proposed methodologies and the FIVES simulator itself can be applied to a broad range of production settings.
The main direction for future work is the development of approaches for better handling the heterogeneity of job I/O behaviors. In this work we have resorted to defining job classes based on average I/O performance to handle this heterogeneity, which has proved effective but has limitations. We have defined our three jobs classes in a somewhat arbitrary manner, but it is likely that better classes could be defined. Developing a methodology to automatically pick the appropriate number of classes and the criteria for defining these classes would be a key advance. Regardless, within each job class there is still heterogeneity in the patterns of I/O operations (e.g., the number and frequency of distinct I/O phases throughout a job's execution). In this work we have not considered these patterns because the needed information was not present in our workload traces. As a result, within a job class, simulated job behaviors are artificially more homogeneous than in the 9